# Glossary

## Embedding

## faiss

* library for efficient similarity search and clustering
* [Faiss: A library for efficient similarity search](https://engineering.fb.com/2017/03/29/data-infrastructure/faiss-a-library-for-efficient-similarity-search/) (2017)

> This month, we released Facebook AI Similarity Search (Faiss), a library that
> allows us to quickly **search for multimedia documents that are similar to
> each other** [...]

> AI tools, like text embedding (word2vec) or convolutional neural net (CNN)
> descriptors trained with deep learning, generate high-dimensional vectors. [...]

> This is where similarity search kicks in. The vector representation for
> images is designed to produce similar vectors for similar images, where
> similar vectors are defined as those that are nearby in Euclidean space.

Also:

> Faiss is a library for efficient similarity search and clustering of dense
> vectors. It contains algorithms that search in sets of vectors of any size,
> up to ones that possibly do not fit in RAM.

Two approaches: 1) binary vectors, quantization codes; these only use the
compressed representation, scales up to billions of vectors on a single
machine; 2) using indices (HNSW, NSG) to make search more efficient

Cf. [https://arxiv.org/pdf/1702.08734.pdf](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1702.08734.pdf)

> Similarity search finds application in specialized database
systems handling complex data such as images or videos, which are typically
represented by high-dimensional features and require specific indexing
structures. This paper tackles the problem of better utilizing GPUs for this
task.

----

> TODO: Take gutenberg texts, chop them into paragraphs, calculate embedding
> for each paragraph, use that for indexing, then find "similar passages" in the corpus.

----

## fasttext

* C++ library to run word2vec, fast

## Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)

## Similarity

* measure of distance between two points in a space
* different metrics: euclidean (real vectors), hamming (binary vectors),
  manhattan or taxicab or city block (preferred in integer feature space),
minkowski (generalization of euclidean and manhattan, with "order" parameter,
that may be used as hyperparameter), ...
* distance measure is a key in many algorithm, e.g. KNN, K-Means clustering, ...

## Vector Database

> Guessing

* stores vectors
* queries are words or paragraphs, embeddings in the vector space are calculated and the most similar vectors are retrieved
* basically similarity search

> Resources

* [https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/semantic-kernel/memories/vector-db](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/semantic-kernel/memories/vector-db)

> The vectors are usually generated by applying some kind of transformation or
> embedding function to the raw data, such as text, images, audio, video, and
> others.

> [...] fast and accurate similarity search and retrieval of data based on their
> vector distance or similarity.

Use cases:

* find images that are similar to a given image based on their visual content and style
* find documents that are similar to a given document based on their topic and sentiment
* find products that are similar to a given product based on their features and ratings

> [...] To perform similarity search and retrieval in a vector database, you need
to use a query vector that represents your desired information or criteria. The
query vector can be either derived from the same type of data as the stored
vectors (e.g., using an image as a query for an image database), or from
different types of data (e.g., using text as a query for an image database).
Then, you need to use a similarity measure that calculates how close or distant
two vectors are in the vector space. The similarity measure can be based on
various metrics, such as cosine similarity, euclidean distance, hamming
distance, jaccard index.

As a helper for an LLM:

> One use case for storing information in a vector database is to enable large
language models (LLMs) to generate more relevant and coherent text based on an
AI plugin.

Number of tools:

* [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector), postgres 12+ extension,
with [Go support](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector-go), which in turn
supports [sqlx](https://github.com/jmoiron/sqlx)
* [milvus](https://github.com/milvus-io/milvus)

## word2vec

...